There is an ongoing need for volunteers at Bethel and on theocratic construction projects.
Are you interested in temporary or permanent service in these ways?
If so, we encourage you to watch the video Making Yourself Available for Bethel Service,
which can be found on JW.org.
In addition, pioneers between the ages of 23 and 65 who are interested in expanding their
ministry are invited to contact their congregation secretary and fill in the online application
to attend this school for Kingdom Evangelizers.
You may be seated.
How can we maintain our joy in Jehovah's work despite pressure from the world around us?
Please follow along in your Bible as Brother Samuel heard of the governing body, introduces
and applies the dramatic Bible reading entitled Jehovah Cause Them To Rejoice.
Served Jehovah with Rejoicing says Psalm 100 verse 2.
Yes, Jehovah wants us to be joyful, and he's given us many reasons to rejoice.
He gave us life with his many joys.
He gave us the Bible to teach us how to enjoy life, and he guides us into countless joyful
experiences.
Yes, Jehovah is the God who gives joy.
Satan, however, does not want us to find joy in serving Jehovah.
Why not?
For one thing, he knows that joy helps us to keep on preaching and teaching the very work
he wants to stop, so he tries to destroy our joy.
Sometimes, through official opposition, and at other times through family and community
pressure, Satan also wants us to cut back our service to Jehovah in order to obtain unnecessary
material things.
He wants us to think that getting more and more material things will bring us lasting
joy.
He had won't.
These tactics are not new.
As we now read portions of the books of Ezra, Haggai, and Zachariah, look for lessons
that can help us to serve Jehovah with rejoicing today.
Note what brought Jehovah's people joy back then and what robbed them of their joy, and
consider why and how we can experience the joy of Jehovah today, even under trying circumstances.
Ezra, a priest and a copious of the law of Moses, is the writer of the book that bears his name.
The book of Ezra picks up the history of Israel from the end of Second Chronicles, which
you likely Ezra also wrote.
His 537 BCE, and many Jews are about to return to Judah.
The nation has spent 70 years in captivity to Babylon for practicing idol worship.
They've learned a hard lesson, and never again does the entire nation fall back into idolatry.
Now, the time has come to get pure worship back on its feet in Jerusalem.
The account spans the range of several Persian kings, starting with King Cyrus, and it has
a joyful beginning.
Please open to Ezra chapter 1, verses 1 through 6, and follow along.
In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order that Jehovah's words spoken by Jeremiah
would be fulfilled, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia to make a proclamation
throughout his kingdom, which he also put in writing, saying,
This is what King Cyrus of Persia says.
Jehovah, the God of the heavens has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has commissioned
me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
Whoever there is among you of all his people, may his God be with him, and let him go up
to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and rebuild the house of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
He is the true God, whose house was in Jerusalem.
Anyone who is residing as a foreigner, wherever he may be, let him be helped by his neighbors,
by their giving him silver and gold, goods and livestock, along with the voluntary
offering for the house of the true God, which was in Jerusalem.
Then, the heads of the paternal houses of Judah, and of Benjamin, and the priests and the
Levites, everyone who spirit the true God had stirred, prepared to go up and rebuild the
house of Jehovah, which was in Jerusalem.
All those around them supported them by giving them utensils of silver and of gold, goods,
livestock and valuable things, besides all the voluntary offerings.
Just imagine, Jehovah returns the Jews to their land with a commission from King Cyrus
himself to rebuild the temple.
Many Jews joyfully take up this assignment.
However, those who for various reasons cannot give financial support to those who can,
likely in the early spring of 537 BCE, nearly 50,000 Israelites depart Babylon, leading
them are high priest Jesua, also called Jesua, and the governor whom Cyrus appointed
cerebral.
In the early autumn, they arrive in Judah, and they are joyful.
But how can they sustain that joy?
Not what they do as soon as they get settled.
Let's read Ezra chapter 3 verses 1 through 6.
When the 7th month arrived, and the Israelites were in their cities, they gathered together
with one accord in Jerusalem.
Jesua, the son of Jehazadak and his fellow priests, and Zerubbabel, the son of Shialtyel,
and his brothers, rose up and built the altar of the God of Israel, so that they could offer
up burnt sacrifices on it.
As it is written in the law of Moses, the man of the true God, so they set the altar
up on its former site, despite their fear of the peoples of the surrounding lands, and
they began offering up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on it, the morning, and the evening
burnt sacrifices.
Then, they held the festival of booths, according to what is written, and day by day they offered
up the specified number of burnt sacrifices that were required each day.
Afterward, they offered up the regular burnt offering, and the offerings for the new moons,
and those for all the sanctified festival seasons of Jehovah, as well as those from everyone
who willingly offered a voluntary offering to Jehovah.
From the first day of the 7th month, they started to offer up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah,
and knew the foundation of Jehovah's Temple had not yet been laid.
Did you notice that the Jews re-institute Jehovah's worship, despite their fear of
the peoples of the surrounding lands?
Because of their courageous action, this is a very joyful time.
It's just as Moses said when he instructed the nations to celebrate the festival of booths.
You will become nothing but joyful.
The next year, they courageously and joyfully lay the foundation for the temple.
Let's read about that at Ezra, chapter 3, verses 10-13.
When the builders laid the foundation of the temple of Jehovah, then the priests and
officials loathing with the trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asah, with the symbols,
stood up to praise Jehovah, according to the direction of King David of Israel.
And they began to sing in response by praising and giving thanks to Jehovah, for he is good,
his loyal love toward Israel endures forever.
Then all the people shouted with a loud shout of praise to Jehovah, because the foundation
of the house of Jehovah had been laid.
Many of the priests, the Levites and the heads of the paternal houses, the old man who had
seen the former house, wept with a loud voice when they saw the foundation of this house
being laid, while many others shouted joyfully at the top of their voice, so the people could
not distinguish the sound of the joyful shouts from the sound of the weeping, for the people
were shouting so loudly that the sound was heard from a great distance.
Yes, some of the oldest members of the nation cannot imagine how this temple could possibly
match the glory of Solomon's temple, but the others joyful shouting over powers their
weeping.
The people of the surrounding lands, however, do not rejoice.
Instead they cunningly target Israel's joy.
When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the returned exiles were building a temple
to Jehovah the God of Israel, they immediately approached the rubble bell and the heads of the
paternal houses and said to them,
Let us build along with you, for like you, we worship your God, and we have been sacrificing
to him since the days of King Ezer hadn't of Assyria who brought us here.
However, the rubble bell and Joshua, and the rest of the heads of the paternal houses
of Israel, said to them,
You have no share with us in building a house to our God, for we alone will build it to
Jehovah the God of Israel, just as King Cyrus the King of Persia has commanded us.
The rubble discerns that behind their enemies offered a help lurk bad motives.
When he rejects their offer, they try to prevent the Jews from working on the temple.
Notice how verses 4-7 continue.
Then the people of the land were continually discouraging the people of Judah and disheartening
them from building.
They hired advisors against them to frustrate their plans, all the days of King Cyrus of
Persia, until the reign of King Darius of Persia.
At the beginning of the reign of a Hazooerus, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants
of Judah and Jerusalem.
And in the days of King Aras Xerxes of Persia, Bishlan, Mithredath, Tabiel, and the rest
of his colleagues, wrote to Aras Xerxes the King.
They translated the letter into Aramaic, writing it with Aramaic characters.
Let's read what Riham, the chief government official and others of Israel's enemies,
write to the King, consider what kind of false accusations they make, as recorded at
Ezra 4 verses 11-16.
This is a copy of the letter that they sent him.
To King Aras Xerxes from your servants, the men of the region beyond the river,
and now let it be known to the King that the Jews who came up here from you to us
have arrived at Jerusalem.
They are rebuilding the rebellious and wicked city, and they are finishing the walls and
repairing the foundations. Now let it be known to the King that if this city should be rebuilt,
and its walls finished, they will not give tax, tribute, or toll.
And it will result in a loss to the treasuries of the kings.
Since we eat the salt of the palace, and it is not proper for us to see the kings' interests
harmed, we have therefore sent to make this known to the King,
so that there may be an investigation of the book of records of your ancestors.
You will find in the book of records and learn that this city is a rebellious city.
Injurious to kings and provinces, and within it have been those stirring up
sedition from ancient times. That is why this city was destroyed.
We are making known to the King that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are finished,
you will have no control of the region beyond the river.
To those false accusations sound familiar? They are the same ones our enemies sometimes hurl
against us today. They don't pay taxes. They work against the government's inches. They're rebellious
and seditious. They're uncontrollable. All false charges, of course. And back then they had their
effect. The King orders to work halted, and temple rebuilding comes to a standstill. How sad.
When the Jews first returned, they didn't let fear of man stop them from doing Jehovah's work.
But now they do. Many of us today face increasing opposition to Jehovah's work.
But compromising our giving up has never brought any one joy just the opposite.
Remaining faithful brings joy, even in the face of violent persecution.
But how is that possible? Consider a true life example.
Picture a mother and daughter surrounded by a mob of angry men demanding that they buy
political party cards. What would the sisters do? If they compromised and bought the cards,
their persecutors would rejoice. But afterward the sisters would be miserable, knowing they had denied
their heavenly father. The sisters did not give in. Of course they didn't enjoy being ridiculed and
mistreated. Later, however, their consciences were clean, and they felt deep joy, knowing they
had remained faithful to Jehovah. What about the Jews of Ezra's Day? Many may have left a stable
life in Babylon to make the Argus trek to Judah. Now after about 14 years of constant opposition from
the lane of the temple's foundation up to the ban, the Jews have lost their zeal for Jehovah's work.
They go through the motions of offering sacrifices, but they're not doing what Jehovah told them to do,
finish rebuilding the temple. When they meet resistance, they rationalize that it must not
be Jehovah's time to finish the work. Apparently even the governor is irrebable and high-priest
Jesuah need encouragement. To provide it, Jehovah sends the prophet Haggai. Let's turn now to the
book of Haggai chapter 1. Haggai's clear and powerful messages delivered during a period of
about four months get right to the heart of the matter as we read the Haggai chapter 1 verses 2
through 11. This is what Jehovah of Army says. These people say, the time is not yet come for the
house of Jehovah to be built. And the word of Jehovah again came through Haggai the prophet,
saying, Is it the time for you to dwell in your panelled houses while this house lies in ruins?
Now this is what Jehovah of Army says. Set your heart on your ways. You have sown much seed,
but you harvest little. You eat, but it is not to satisfaction. You drink, but you do not drink your
fill. You put on clothing, but no one gets warm. The one who hires himself out puts his wages
in a bag full of holes. This is what Jehovah of Army says. Set your heart on your ways.
Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber and build the house so that I may take pleasure in it
and I may be glorified, Jehovah says. You were expecting much and receiving little. And when you
brought it into the house, I blew it away. For what reason declared Jehovah of Armies?
Because my house is in ruins while each of you runs around taking care of his own house.
So the heavens above you withheld their due and the earth withheld its produce. And I kept calling for
a drought on the earth, on the mountains, on the grain, on the new wine, on the oil, on what grows
from the ground, on humans and livestock, and on all the labor of your hands.
Jehovah compares the results of the Jews' self-centered efforts to those of a hired worker who puts
his wages into a moth eaten sack. Because the Jews are neglecting the house of Jehovah,
he holds back his blessing. The results of the Jews' labor are limited and their lives lack joy.
Evidently, some try to feel that void by beautifying their own homes. But material things cannot
satisfy spiritual needs. Can we see the warning here for us? It's not wrong to enjoy nice things,
but material things cannot bring us true and lasting joy, especially if we neglect Jehovah's work
to obtain them. Remember the lesson of Psalm 127, verse 1,
unless Jehovah builds the house? It is in vain that his builders work hard on it. On the other hand,
when we unselfishly seek first God's kingdom and his righteousness, he provides what we really need
and adjust the right time. As Proverbs chapter 10 verse 22 tells us,
it is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, and he adds no pain with it.
But now will this rebuild temple really not attain to its former glory, as some believe?
So hey guys, Jehovah guarantees that the future glory of this house will be even greater.
Let's continue reading the hey guy chapter 2 verses 3 through 9.
Who is left among you who saw this house in its former glory? How does it look to you now?
Does it not seem like nothing in comparison? But now be strong, Zerubba Bell,
declares Jehovah, and be strong Joshua, son of Jehazadak, the High Priest, and be strong all
you people of the land, declares Jehovah. And work, for I am with you, declares Jehovah of armies.
Remember what I promised you when you came out of Egypt, and my spirit remains among you. Do not
be afraid. For this is what Jehovah of Army says, yet once more in a little while, and I will shake
the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and I will shake all the nations,
and the precious things of all the nations will come in, and I will fill this house with glory,
says Jehovah of armies. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, declares Jehovah of armies.
The future glory of this house will be greater than the former, says Jehovah of armies.
Yes, when the Creator and owner of the entire universe declares his purpose, who are what could
possibly prevent him from carrying it out? Nothing and no one. Jehovah's straightforward message is
unmistakable. Still, the return ease need more encouragement. Jehovah sends his angel to another
prophet, Zachariah. Please turn to Zachariah chapter 1 verses 12 through 16, and let's read together
the angel's reassuring words for Israel. That is Zachariah 1 12 through 16.
So the angel of Jehovah said, oh Jehovah of armies, how long will you withhold your mercy from
Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, with whom you have been indignant these 70 years?
Jehovah answered the angel who was speaking with me, with kind and comforting words.
Then, the angel who was speaking with me told me, call out, this is what Jehovah of armies says,
I am zealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion with a great zeal. With great indignation, I am
indignant with the nations that are at ease, because I felt indignant to a small extent, but they
added to the calamity. Therefore, this is what Jehovah said, I will return to Jerusalem with mercy,
and my own house will be built in her, declares Jehovah of armies, and a measuring line will be
stretched out over Jerusalem. To emphasize just how protective Jehovah will be, the angel continues
at chapter 2 verses 7-9. Come, Zion, make your escape. You who are dwelling with the daughter of
Babylon? For this is what Jehovah of armies says, who after being glorified has sent me to the nations
that were plundering you. Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye. For now, I will wave my
hand against them, and they will become plunder for their own slaves, and you will certainly know that
Jehovah of armies has sent me. Would you let someone poke his finger in your eye? Of course not. Neither
will Jehovah allow Israel's opposers to harm them. Then, in Zechariah chapter 3 verses 1 and 2,
the angel reveals the greater enemy behind the opposition.
And he showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the angel of Jehovah,
and Satan was standing at his right hand to resist him. Then the angel of Jehovah said to Satan,
Is all this intended simply to build up Israel's confidence in themselves? On the contrary,
they need to remember that only with Jehovah's help can they accomplish anything.
Listen to the angel's further words to Zechariah in chapter 4 verses 6 through 7.
This is the word of Jehovah to the rebel. Not by a military force, nor by power,
but by my spirit says Jehovah of armies. Who are you, O great mountain? Before the rebel, you will
become a level land, and he will bring out the top stone amid shots of how wonderful, how wonderful.
Energized by Jehovah's motivating words to his two prophets, the Jews stop wavering in a lack of
faith and resume construction of the temple. Predictably, Israel's enemy and neighbors,
led by Tatanai and Sheth Arbazinai also spring into action. Returning to the book of Ezra,
we read at chapter 5 verses 3 through 5. At that time, Tatanai, the governor of the region
beyond the river, and sheath Arbazinai, and their colleagues came to them and asked them,
who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure? Then they asked them,
what are the names of the men who are working on this building? But God was watching over the elders
of the Jews, and they did not stop them until the report could be sent to Darius, and an official
document could be sent back concerning this. So there's another lesson for us today, when we
courageously do Jehovah's work despite opposition. Jehovah blesses our efforts and enables us to keep
on serving in. For now though, the Jews must continue their work on the temple under ban.
The king who issued the ban, however, was assassinated after raining only seven months.
So Tatanai and his accomplices are dealing with a new king, Darius I.
In denouncing the Jews, they try to use the rubbables onwards against him,
including his statement that King Cyrus issued the order to rebuild the temple.
They ask King Darius to investigate whether that's really so. Darius orders the investigation.
What will King Darius decide? Will the Jews renewed faith and determination bring them joy
or just more trouble? Darius learns that Cyrus did indeed order that the temple be rebuilt.
At Ezra chapter 6, verses 6-12, we read,
derives stinging reply. So now, Tatanai, the governor of the region beyond the river,
sheath our Bosnianai and your colleagues, the lesser governors of the region beyond the river.
Stay away from there. Do not interfere with the work on that house of God. The governor of the Jews
and the elders of the Jews will rebuild that house of God in its former place.
Furthermore, I am issuing an order as to what you are to do for these elders of the Jews
for rebuilding that house of God. From the royal treasury, from the tax collected in the
region beyond the river, the expenses are to be promptly given to these men to continue without
interruption. And whatever is needed, young bulls as well as rams and lambs for the burnt
offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, just as the priests or in Jerusalem say,
is to be given them continually, day by day without fail, so that they may continually present
offerings that please the God of the heavens and pray for the life of the king and his sons.
I have also issued an order that if anyone violates this decree, a timber will be pulled out of his
house, and he will be lifted up and fastened to it, and his house will be turned into a public
latrine for this offense. And may the God who has caused his name to reside there overthrow any
king and people who lift a hand to violate this order and destroy that house of God, which is in
Jerusalem. I, Darius, issue this order. Let it be done promptly. Upon receiving the king's command,
Tata Nain and his colleagues have no choice. Not only must they stop interfering with the work on
the temple, they must help finance it. What a joyful outcome for the faithful Jews. In 515 BCE,
they hold the inauguration of the house of God with joy, and as we read it, verse 22,
they also joyfully held the festival of unleavened bread for seven days, for Jehovah
caused them to rejoice, and he had made the heart of the king of Assyria favorable toward them,
so that he supported them in the work of the house of the true God, the God of Israel.
Today, when wise and just officials similarly intervene in our behalf, we're very grateful to them,
but we're most grateful to Jehovah for directing matters. As Proverbs 21, verse 1 says,
a king's heart is like streams of water in Jehovah's hand. He directs it wherever he pleases,
so we do not put our ultimate hope in any ruler, our institution of this world.
None of them can bring us permanent salvation. In fact, before the end of Satan's system,
all the nations will turn against Jehovah's people, but they'll experience an outcome worse
than that they've tantinized. What lessons can we draw from these portions of Ezra Haggai and
Zachariah? First, Jehovah blesses our determined efforts to keep on doing his work,
despite challenges, but he frustrates the efforts of our composers. Second, when we put Jehovah's
work ahead of material comforts, he gives us true joy. What's the work Jesus commissioned us to do today?
He made it very clear in his parting words to his followers. Go, therefore, and make disciples
of people of all the nations. Are we with our hearts and hands putting this assignment ahead
of material goals? Haggai, for told that one day, Jehovah's Temple would become far more glorious
than the one Solomon built. That prophecy is being fulfilled today. Jehovah is using our preaching
to shake the nations, millions of precious things. New worshipers are coming to him.
These are joyfully flocking to the great spiritual temple, Jehovah's arrangement for worshiping him
on the basis of Jesus' ransom sacrifice. Now is not the time to focus our attention on paneled
houses or on any other unnecessary pursuit. Very soon, on a day we do not expect Satan's world
will end, and we will enter Jehovah's New World. So no matter how Satan tries to discourage
our distractus now, may we never let him rob us of our joy in Jehovah.
May we rather walk with Jehovah right into his peaceful New World,
where we will serve him forever with rejoicing. Zehruppable, Joshua, Haggai, and Zachariah
have done much to help Israel regain Jehovah's favor. Later, in 468 BCE, Ezra himself
comes to Jerusalem to support true worship, but the nation needs still more direction.
So Jehovah sends them another brave leader. During the next two days of this convention,
we'll learn about that faithful and powerful man, Nehemiah.
The Bible account of Ezra and the messages of the prophets Haggai and Zachariah assure us that
nothing can prevent Jehovah from blessing our work and causing us to rejoice.
You'll be pleased to know that the dramatic Bible reading that you just enjoyed
is available for download today from JW.org and in the JW Library app. We worship a god of saving acts.
What does this mean for us as a group and for you personally? What can we look forward to in the
future? Please pay close attention to Brother Mark Sanderson of the governing body. As he answers
these questions in the talk, rejoice and Jehovah's acts of salvation. Around the world, people
everywhere are looking for a Savior. They long for a Savior who can rescue them from disease,
from hunger, from poverty, from crime, from war, even from death. Well, in the midst of so many
calamities and so many problems, why are Jehovah's people rejoicing? Because our magnificent,
our Almighty God, Jehovah, is that Savior. We have Him. And as a result, we feel joy in our hearts.
The Scriptures describe Jehovah as being a grand Savior. We know it is a part of His personality,
His identity, to want to rescue and save His faithful servants. Well, knowing that Jehovah wants
to save us, how should it make us feel? Let's open our Bibles and look at this thought in the book of
Psalms, Psalm 9 and verse 14. It says, so that I may declare your praiseworthy deeds in the gates of
the daughter of Zion and rejoice in your acts of salvation. So now, how should we feel about
Jehovah's ability to save us, about His acts of salvation? Well, the Psalmist said, we want to
rejoice in Jehovah's ability to save. And really, brothers, when we have a faith, a confidence
that Jehovah wants to save us, that He has the ability to save us, and that He has ways and
means to save us, this truly is a reason for us to rejoice. If we have that faith, if we have that
confidence, we are going to be able to face the future with real confidence, knowing that whatever
trial may come our way, we have our Savior. But now, brothers, to reassure us, to strengthen our
confidence that Jehovah really is our Savior, it helps us to look to the past, to Bible times,
to see how Jehovah rescued and saved his people both as a nation, but also as individuals.
Now, let's look rapidly at three different examples from the Scriptures where Jehovah saved his
people as a nation. Now, here's the first one. It's from Exodus chapter 14. Now, you'll remember here
that the nation of Israel was right there at the Red Sea with Pharaoh's armies all around.
Well, it looked hopeless, but what did Jehovah do? He opened up that Red Sea right in front of his
people and allowed them to walk through on dry land. What a salvation that was. And then,
what about in the time of Jehoshaphat and the nation of Judah? Do you remember when all those
armies of the opposing nations came and surrounded them again? Well, now, Jehoshaphat in 2nd Chronicles
chapter 20, he looked to Jehovah and he said, Jehovah, we just, we don't know what to do, but our
eyes are toward you. Well, what did Jehovah do? He said, take your position, stand still, and see the
salvation of Jehovah. Well, that's what they did. They went out, they took their position,
and without them having to fight it all, Jehovah threw those other armies into confusion,
and they all wiped each other out without the nation of Judah having to do a thing. Jehovah saved
his people. And as a third example, what about Hezekiah? Now, we've had this amazing Bible drama
several years ago at our regional convention where we saw Hezekiah look to Jehovah for for his
salvation and what happened? Well, Jehovah sent one angel, wiped out 185,000 men in one night.
Well, now, what's the point, brothers? It's obvious from our review of the Scriptures that Jehovah
is a savior of his people as a group, as a nation. We've seen it over and over again in the
Scriptures. But what about as individuals? Well, now, here's a nice example of what the Bible says
here in Psalm 34. Let's read it first before we look at the example. It's Psalm 34 and verse 18,
Psalm 34, verse 18, it says, Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted. He saves those who are crushed
in spirit. Many are the hardships of the righteous one, but what does it say here? Notice, brothers?
But Jehovah rescues him from them all. So what is it? What's the point? See, Jehovah rescues the righteous
one, not just the righteous nation, but the righteous one. Now, here's our example. Think about the
faithful woman Hannah. Now, you remember her situation. Hannah was barren. She was constantly being
harassed and tormented by her husband's other wife, Penina. And so she went to the temple and she
poured out her heart to Jehovah. Will you look at this with me? Let's go to first Samuel, chapter 1,
first Samuel, chapter 1. And you see here, you see here that in verse 10, it says that Hannah was
extremely bitter. And she began to pray to Jehovah and to weep uncontrollably.
Well, this faithful servant of God just poured out her heart, begged Jehovah for his help, but
she had a very specific request. You see, verse 11, she asked Jehovah for a child, a male child,
and she told Jehovah, if she would get this child, she would dedicate him to the service of God.
Well, what happened? You see, look down here at verse 18.
Once Hannah had expressed this prayer to Jehovah, in effect, she just had thrown her burden onto him.
Look at what verse 18 says. Her face was no longer downcast. Well, do you remember at the
beginning, she was extremely bitter. Now it says, her face was no longer downcast. What does it mean?
Well, Jehovah was already giving her the strength to be able to endure her situation,
but it didn't end there because now look at verse 20. Within a year, it says, Hannah became pregnant.
So Jehovah gave her the request of her heart. Well, can you imagine how Hannah must have felt?
If you look over at chapter 2 in verse 1, look what she says. My heart rejoices in Jehovah.
My horn is exalted by Jehovah. My mouth is opened wide against my enemies for I rejoice
in your acts of salvation. Well, now obviously, Hannah rejoiced that Jehovah had become her
savior and that she had experienced his acts of salvation. What's the point, brothers?
What's the point? Well, as individuals, we can pray to Jehovah with our specific distresses,
with our specific requests and concerns. We know that Jehovah honors those who honor him,
and we know all of us have experienced when we feel that Jehovah has heard our prayer,
and he is in some way acted in our behalf. But now let's look at another example.
Here it's Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Now you remember those three faithful Hebrews were there,
and the King Nebuchadnezzar had erected this golden image, and he said everyone had to bow down to it,
or they would be thrown into the fiery furnace. Well, what did Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego do?
They absolutely refused to obey that order. They had to listen to Jehovah. Well,
those men were tied up, just as Nebuchadnezzar had warned. They were tied up, and they were thrown
into that fiery furnace. But now, dear brothers, I want you to think about this. How do you imagine
this scene in your mind? Do you think that as they were going into the fiery furnace, they were
all in a panic, and they were regretting their decision? Oh, I'm so sorry that I didn't bow down
to the image. Absolutely not. Just look at what these men said. Look at Daniel, chapter 3, Daniel,
chapter 3. Let's look at verse 16 here. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered the King.
Oh, Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter. If it must be, our God whom we serve
is able to rescue us from the burning fiery furnace, and to rescue us from your hand. But even if he
does not, let it be known to you, O King, that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of
gold that you have set up. Well, now, when you hear those words, is there any regret there?
Is there any weakness? Is there any panic? No. Even though they were facing death,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego faced it with courage. They faced it with resolve. They faced it
with dignity. Well, how they must have rejoiced when, after being rescued, even Nebuchadnezzar himself
had to praise Jehovah for the way he had rescued his servants. One of our brothers, what's the point
of this review? Obviously, in Bible times, Jehovah God has saved his people both as a nation and as
individuals. And we know that Jehovah delights to do this and that it is a cause for rejoicing
when Jehovah's servants experience his salvation. But now, here's the question.
We know Jehovah delights to rescue us, to save us. We know he's moved to do so by his loyal love.
But what does it really mean? Does it mean today that when any sort of trial comes our way,
that Jehovah is just going to rush in, he's just going to intervene and rescue us every time?
No, it does not. It does not mean that. Now, why? If Jehovah loves us and he has the power,
why is it that he isn't rescuing us from every situation? Well, do you remember what Satan
said to Jehovah about Job in Job chapter 1? See, Satan said, you've put a hedge around Job. You've
blessed everything he does. You haven't allowed any calamity to come to him. The only reason he
serves you is just because of selfish reasons. He doesn't really love you. He just worships you for
what he can get from you. You see, that same charge could be made about any of us. If Jehovah
just rescued us from everything, so what will Jehovah do? Well, when we're facing trials,
it's true, in some circumstances, Jehovah may remove the trial. But in many other situations,
Jehovah may strengthen us so that we'll be able to review the trial. Excuse me, endure the trial.
Either way, when we feel, when we experience that Jehovah is acting on our behalf, how does it
make us feel? We truly, truly rejoice. You know, brothers, this is not theory. This very week,
I lost my own father in death. My father was 90 years old. He had served Jehovah faithfully
for 63 years. Now, brothers, this is a trial that every single one of us experience as God's
people. But some of you like me, we've experienced the death of a loved one during this coronavirus
pandemic. I'll tell you, it's not an easy situation. But what can we say? Well, I can say myself,
we have felt the love of Jehovah in all of the emails, in all of the phone calls, in all the
different ways brothers and sisters have found to provide the support that we need. That's been
true, in my case, I know it's been true for all of you who've had the same or very similar
experience at this difficult time. Jehovah is giving us what we need so that we can continue on
to serve him faithfully. And so when some big trial comes your way, ask yourself, am I confident
that Jehovah's loyal love is going to move him to act on my behalf? Are his acts of salvation
going to be manifest for me so that I am going to feel them myself? And then does that confidence
that Jehovah is going to intervene, that he is going to help us cause us to rejoice and be happy
in the knowledge that our God is with us? Well, now in the following video, I want you to take notice
of this beautiful experience of a dear sister who did not have the trial removed, removed from her,
but just notice how Jehovah has strengthened her to be able to endure.
I was born in Malawi in 1962. I lost my eyesight at two years of age because of an eye disease.
We have to rely on the reins for the food we eat and sell as it is our only source of income.
I also look after both my parents. My father is 99 years old and my mother is 92 years old.
Jehovah's is very time consuming. There are a lot of household chores to do to keep things clean
and neat, like fetching water for our daily needs. In the evening, after we have eaten,
this is the time for reading. When I was young, father took the lead in our family worship,
which he still does, but now because of his failing eyesight, I read to them. I read with my fingers,
so nighttime is no problem. My fingers are my eyes. One scripture that really touches my heart
is James 5-11, which says, look, we consider happy those who have endured. Job endured his trials,
and at the end, he saw all the good that Jehovah had blessed him with. This convinces me that Jehovah
who act in the near future, blessing us with all the things we are lacking, fulfilling all his promises,
and so I am happy to endure. God's kingdom and his sovereignty are first in my life.
It is only God's kingdom that will solve all these problems.
I feel privileged that I have been able to save as a regular pioneer for 36 years now,
and have been blessed to help 64 persons to know Jehovah. I am so happy with songs 76.
I don't see myself as poor. I have the Bible and many different publications in Jehovah Braille.
We have the congregation, the ministry, and our brothers and sisters. All these things make me
very happy. We are not worried about our current situation because we are spiritually rich.
Sonyezadi kamabobun zitai.
Wasn't that amazing to see that beautiful experience of our sister?
Now, Jehovah hasn't taken away her trial. She's still blind.
She still has a very limited means, but look how Jehovah has blessed her.
Look how she's able to help so many people to come to know about Jehovah. How wonderful.
But now let's look at a second video. Now we're going to watch a video where
Jehovah really did step in and remove a trial from our dear brother who was in a refugee camp.
Let's watch.
Because of the civil war, we had to take refuge in a safer part of the country.
When we arrived, soldiers took us to internment camps to hold us until they could confirm our
identities. In the camps, we lived in tents and it was unbearably hot in them.
It was a struggle even to get water. We needed to wait in a queue for four to five hours every day.
During the war, our eldest son was killed. It was a big loss for our family.
All we could do to cope was pray to Jehovah and find comfort in the Bible.
One day, the brothers from the Relief Committee came and informed us that a regional convention
would be held. They had spoken to the camp officials requesting permission for us to go.
For four days, morning and evening, we went to the officials to ask for permission.
But they would not tell us if we would be released for the convention.
Suddenly, one afternoon, much to our surprise, we were approved to leave the camp for five days.
At that time, we had been in the internment camp for months. We had not been allowed to go anywhere.
We were so happy that we got the permission to attend the convention, we never expected it.
At the time, we had some clothes, but we had nothing for the three-day convention.
However, the brothers outside the camp helped us enormously.
They were with us cared for all our needs, so we could be ready for the convention.
We still wondered where we were going to stay and how we would get our recommendations.
However, when we arrived, the brothers hugged us and warmly welcomed us. We were really encouraged.
Even though we faced many challenges and difficulties in the internment camp,
that convention was like a nourishing meal for us. It was a real joy eating at Jehovah's table.
We can never forget those moments. After the convention, the brothers from the governing
body gave a special talk to those from the internment camps that are really strengthened us.
The convention helped us to be courageous, especially after we returned to the camp.
Although we faced many losses, the convention not only gave us comfort,
but also helped us to face the challenges ahead.
Now, my younger son and I are serving as ministerial servants.
And my wife has been serving as a regular pioneer for the past 17 years.
She continued pioneering even while we were in the internment camp.
We realized that Jehovah is always there, caring for us and sustaining us continuously.
So how wonderful that our amazing God, Jehovah, helped this dear brother and his family
so that they would be able to attend the convention. Well, dear brothers, what have we seen
thus far in this talk? We've been able to see that in the past, in Bible times,
Jehovah was the savior of his people. And in our modern times, right now, we see how Jehovah
is strengthening us and acting on our behalf so that we can continue to serve him faithfully.
But now, what about the very near future? What can we say about that?
Well, we know that these last days are very soon going to lead into the great tribulation.
As Jesus said at Matthew 24-21, this is going to be a great tribulation, such as has not occurred
since the world's beginning until now, nor will occur again. After the destruction of Babylon
the Great and before the outbreak of Armageddon, what is going to happen?
Gog of Maygog, this coalition of nations is going to lead an all-out attack on Jehovah's
servants. Well, now, knowing that that attack is coming closer and closer every day, how should we
be feeling? Should it make us feel just completely filled with anxiety? Should we be in terror of
those events that are coming? Not at all. Please read with me what Jesus said here in Revelation
chapter 2. Now, in Revelation 2 and verse 10, Jesus is speaking to anointed Christians in the
congregation of Smyrna. Now, notice what he says to them. Do not be afraid of the things that you
are about to suffer. Look, the devil will keep on throwing some of you into prison so that you
may be fully put to the test, and you will have tribulation for 10 days, prove yourself faithful
even to death, and I will give you the crown of life. Now, what do we discern from these words
of Jesus? Well, first of all, those who die faithfully and keep their integrity are guaranteed
to have salvation from Jehovah. But there's something else that we can discern from these words.
It tells us that during these last days, some of Jehovah's servants are going to experience death.
In our modern history already, we know our brothers have been thrown into prison, some have been
tortured, and yes, some have even been put to death because of their integrity. In South Korea,
alone, over a period of some 70 years, 19,352 of our brothers were in prison, and five of those
brothers were actually put to death because of their faith. Well, what can we say about those
brothers in South Korea? Those that died in Nazi Germany and those that died in Eritrea and
those that died during the Soviet Union because of their faith, we know that their salvation is
completely assured. They are completely safe in the safest place in the universe, the memory
of our Grand God, Jehovah. Well, then, what about our brothers who are experiencing persecution
right now? We know that some of our brothers are watching this program right now in countries
where our work is banned or under very, very severe restriction. What can we say about those
dear brothers and sisters? Well, let's read together this encouraging thought. In Psalm 67,
Psalm 67 and verse 1, it says, God will show us favor and bless us. He will make his face shine upon us
so that your way may be known throughout the earth, your acts of salvation among all the nations.
Well, what's the point? You see, Jehovah is doing what verse 1 says. He's showing his favor and
he's blessing his people in these countries where the work is under ban. And as a result,
we are able to see Jehovah's acts of salvation for his people. Well, now there are so many examples
of this. I wish we had another hour to be able to tell you all of them, but I'd like to just share
one experience that is similar to many, many more that we have received. It comes from Russia.
One of our sisters was there in the prison in Russia. Two of the female prisoners who were in
the cell with her were imprisoned for selling drugs. Now, one day, these two prisoners began singing
songs about criminal life. Now, the sister didn't understand the language, but she just knew that
the thoughts and the ideas and these songs were immoral and foul, and she just didn't want to be
in that environment. So she prayed to Jehovah to help her. Well, suddenly, one of the women began
singing song number 120 from our former song book. Well, the sister was shocked. How do you know
this song? She asked. Then they all sang the song together. It turned out that this woman had learned
the song from her mother, who had previously studied the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses and had
memorized the song. Our sister felt the loving hand of Jehovah in responding to her prayer so
quickly. Oh, brothers, it's a wonderful experience, but there are so many similar experiences where
where Jehovah has shown his hand on behalf of his people in small ways and sometimes in big ways.
But let's look at one other experience. There are many examples of where our brothers in the court
room during their own trials have made statements that are similar to what Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego said to Nebuchadnezzar, I just want to give you one example. This is the
statement from brother Sergei Skrinikov that he gave in the courtroom at his own hearing. Here's a
small excerpt. Let us take a look into the future. If for another 10 years or so, the government keeps
putting Jehovah's Witnesses into prisons and correctional colonies, there will be about 200 of them
in every prison. Imagine four congregations of Jehovah's Witnesses in one prison. The prison
administrators will be begging the Ministry of Justice to set Jehovah's Witnesses free. What do
you imagine the majority of the witnesses will be praying for? Lord, don't soften the heart of the
government. Don't let them set me free. I have so many Bible students and sincere people to talk to.
Isn't that wonderful? Just hear the confidence in his voice. But then look, look how he ended
his statement to the court. Here's what he said, God is one and the same whether we are free or
in prison. Therefore, we are not abandoned. He is with us everywhere as long as we stay faithful
to him. Hebrews 136 assures me, Jehovah is my helper. I will not be afraid. What can man do
to me? Jehovah God himself will help me of whom should I be afraid? Well, brothers,
Skrinikov, this very humble brother made this powerful statement in the courtroom. What does it show
us? Obviously, Jehovah is strengthening his people. He's giving them the power, the courage that
they need to be so bold and so frank even before these powerful authorities. Well, what do we expect
in the very near future? This all-out attack of God of May, God will come against God's people.
But when it begins, what is Jehovah going to do? Well, let me read to you just an excerpt from
our pure worship book that just beautifully expresses what we can expect to see.
Before they are destroyed, our enemies will see the sign of the Son of Man, likely a supernatural
manifestation of the power of Jehovah and Jesus. The opposers will see things that cause them
extreme anxiety. As Jesus foretold, people will become faint out of fear and expectation
of the things coming upon the inhabited earth to their horror. They will realize that they miscalculated
when they attacked Jehovah's people. They will be forced to know the creator in his role as
military commander, Jehovah of armies. Jehovah will no doubt unleash heavenly armies and natural
forces in such a way that he protects his loyal servants, but eliminates his enemies. What a powerful
description. It just reminds me of our video, a couple of years ago at our regional convention,
where we saw those forces coming against God's people, and then what did we see? Well, suddenly
from the heavens, here is Jesus Christ, the 144,000, and all those heavenly armies riding into
battle, and you remember Jesus just pulls back that bow and lets that arrow go, and all of those
enemies are gone forever. Brothers and sisters, don't you just long for the day when you will see
those things with your own eyes? What a wonderful time. That will be when we experience the salvation
of Jehovah. Well, what can we say as we have discussed this wonderful topic of Jehovah as our
grand savior? Well, when we look to the future, we really can have the confidence of what Isaiah
chapter 12 and verse 2 says. Let's read it. Isaiah chapter 12 and verse 2. It says, look, God is my
salvation. I will trust and feel no dread for Jehovah is my strength and my might, and he has become
my salvation. Well, just as Isaiah said, we have no reason to fear, we have no reason to dread
if we have our confidence in our in our God Jehovah. Now, whether we face death with dignity
during these last days, or we experience miraculous deliverance at the great tribulation, either way,
what can we say? We know that we will have the same outcome. We will all experience the salvation
that comes from our God, Jehovah, because what is the assurance that Isaiah 54 and verse 17 gives us?
No weapon formed against you will have any success. Well, brothers, if we have that confidence
that Jehovah truly is our grand savior, then no matter what calamity, no matter what terror,
no matter what trial may come upon us now or in the future, we will be able to continue to
rejoice in Jehovah's acts of salvation. Thank you, brother Sanderson, for that scriptural assurance
that Jehovah will always act in our behalf. We invite you now to stand and sing a fitting song
that expresses our confidence in Jehovah. It's song number 148 entitled, Jehovah Provides the